---
layout: post
title: Raw Vegan Chocolate Cheesecake Recipe
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/choc.jpeg
tags: [food]
---

I’m off to a dinner party on Saturday night.

One of the best recommendations that I’ve had regarding how to manage being a Raw Vegan when at a dinner party with non Raw Vegans is to take one dish to share, in this instance, a dessert, and your own starter and main course.

The most important thing is to respect your hostess and not try and out do her by presenting something AMAZING that everyone wants to have instead! A dessert works as it gives people choice. It’s acceptable to try one or more dessert tasters, and, Raw Food desserts are so delicious that they are a great introduction to the art of producing delicious food without cooking!

This is a fabulous recipe, and works really well. It delights all who taste it!

Raw Vegan Chocolate ‘Cheese’cake Recipe
Makes one 8″ cake
Crust -
1 1/2 cups almonds
2/3 cup raisins
1/4 cup dessicated coconut
1-2 teaspoons pure vanilla  essence
Zest of one organic orange , and juice, to bind.

Mix until it is ‘bindable’, and press into the base of a spring form tin to a thickness of about .75/1 cm. Use the back of a spoon to help. This is the base of the ‘cheesec’ake and should hold together when cut.
Filling
2 cups cashews
3 tbsps coconut sugar, or agave syrup to taste
2/3 – 3/4 cup water
2/3 cup cacao powder
1 tablespoon pure vanilla
1/8 teaspoon salt
1/3 cup melted coconut oil
1/4 cup melted coconut butter.

(NB. If you have a high speed blender with a heating facility, you can put in the unmelted coconut oil and butter and heat to under 40 degrees whilst blending)

Blend the cashews, maple, water, vanilla and salt until smooth and creamy in a high speed blender.
Add the coconut oil and butter. Blend to incorporate.
Add the cacao powder last and blend again.The mixture is thick.
Pour over the crust and set in the fridge for at least 12 hours or in the freezer for 6 hours and then transfer to the fridge for a few hours.

Topping. Blend organic berries – blue berries/raspberries/strawberries, and add a tablespoon of chia seeds. The seeds act as a thickening agent. Leave for 30 minutes until spreadable, and add to cheesecake. This is good to do before serving as the berries can loose colour if left too long. Add fruit to garnish.

Sit back and enjoy watching your guests faces light up with amazement and delight!